---
title: Approximate Separability of Greens Function for Helmholtz Equation in the High Frequency Limit
speaker: Hongkai Zhao
speaker-url: http://www.math.uci.edu/~zhao
affil: UC Irvine
date: 2014-10-07 15:00:00
talk-url: https://www.math.ncsu.edu/events/abstract.php?id=2419
series: ncsu-nas
---

Approximate separable representations of Greens functions for differential
operators is a basic and important question in the analysis of differential
equations, the development of efficient numerical algorithms and imaging. Being
able to approximate a Greens function as a sum with few separable terms is
equivalent to low rank properties of corresponding numerical solution
operators. This will allow for matrix compression and fast solution techniques.
Greens functions for coercive elliptic differential operators have been shown
to be highly separable and the resulting low rank property for discretized
system was explored to develop efficient numerical algorithms. However, the
case of Helmholtz equation in the high frequency limit is more challenging both
mathematically and numerically. We introduce new tools based on the study of
relations between two Greens functions with different source points and a tight
dimension estimate for the best linear subspace approximating a set of almost
orthogonal vectors to prove new lower bounds for the number of terms in the
representation for the Greens function for Helmholtz operator in the high
frequency limit. Upper bounds are also derived. We give explicit sharp
estimates for cases that are common in practice and present numerical examples.
This is a joint work with Bjorn Engquist.

