---
title: Toward the Scalable Inversion of Structured Matrices with Standard Admissibility Conditions
speaker: Jack Poulson 
speaker-url: http://web.stanford.edu/~poulson/
affil: Stanford University
date: 2014-09-22 16:30:00
series: mit-amc
talk-url: http://www-math.mit.edu/amc/fall14/poulson.pdf
---

This presentation focuses on the numerical methods developed by our research
group for the simulation of incompressible stratified flows. In addition, the
application of these methods to the investigation of stratified flow processes
beneath the surfaces of the ocean and lakes, namely the interplay between
internal gravity waves and turbulence, will be discussed. Following an
introduction to the environmental importance of such fascinating phenomena, I
will elaborate on the suitability of element-based high-accuracy techniques for
their study. An introduction to the fundamentals of these techniques will then
be given. Example results from three select studies, relying on a spectral
multidomain penalty method (SMPM)-based flow solver, will be shown. Emphasis
will be placed on physical insights gained and the logistics involved with
running large simulations and managing and analyzing the large datasets they
produce. The challenges involved in extending the current version of our
SMPM-solver to accommodate more complex geometries and boundary conditions will
finally be discussed. The emphasis of this final discussion will be on the
design of an efficient parallel solver for the pressure Poisson equation to be
used for the study of highly non-hydrostatic phenomena in high-aspect ratio
domains.
