---
title: Communication-avoiding Krylov subspace methods in finite precision
speaker: Erin Carson
affil: Aspire Lab, UC Berkeley
speaker-url: http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~ecc2z/
date: 2014-12-04 16:15:00
series: stanford-la-opt
---

Communication-avoiding (s-step) Krylov subspace methods can achieve an
$O(s)$ reduction in data movement over classical Krylov subspace methods
for a fixed number of iterations, allowing the potential for significant
speedups on modern computers.  However, although the s-step variants are
equivalent to the classical variants in exact arithmetic, empirical
observations demonstrate that they can behave quite differently in
finite precision.  Increased roundoff errors can manifest as a loss of
accuracy and/or deterioration of convergence rate relative to the
classical method, reducing the potential performance benefits of the
s-step approach.

We present our work in developing efficient techniques for mitigating
the loss of convergence and accuracy in s-step Krylov methods without
sacrificing performance gains, including residual replacement,
reorthogonalization, and preconditioning.  We also summarize our recent
work, which extends the bounds on accuracy for the finite precision
classical Lanczos method given by Paige [Lin. Alg. Appl., 34:235--258,
1980] to the s-step Lanczos method.  Our results indicate that if one
can guarantee that the condition numbers of the precomputed Krylov bases
are not too large in any iteration, then the finite precision behavior
of the s-step Lanczos method will be similar to that of the classical
method.  We conclude with some ideas about how these new bounds can be
applied to improve the finite precision behavior of the s-step Lanczos
method while still achieving an asymptotic reduction in communication.
