---
title: Locally Optimal and Heavy Ball GMRES Methods
speaker: Ren-Cang Li
affil: UT Arlington
speaker-url: http://www.uta.edu/faculty/rcli/
date: 2014-12-08 13:30:00
series: ucb-lapack
---

The Generalized Minimal Residual method (GMRES) seeks optimal approximate
solutions of linear system Ax=b from  Krylov subspaces by minimizing the
residual norm $\|Ax-b\|_2$ over all $x$ in the subspaces.  Its main cost is
computing and storing basis vectors of the subspaces.  For difficult systems,
Krylov subspaces of very high dimensions are necessary for obtaining
approximate solutions with desired accuracy. In such cases, memory requirement
for using GMRES may be too demanding to be practical, and then, as an
alternative, the restarted GMRES  is often used instead. The latter manages to
cut down memory need by simply capping the dimensions of the involved Krylov
spaces and attempts to compute approximate solutions with desired accuracy by
simply repeating GMRES with the approximate solution of current GMRES cycle
used as the intial guess of the next GMRES cycle.  The price to pay  usually is
slower speed of convergence. The key reason for this loss in speed is due to
that in the restarted GMRES, the Krylov space built at each GMRES cycle is
thrown away almost completely in the next cycle, except for the computed
approximation solution at the cycle. How to cut down the loss therefore lies in
how to keep more information in Krylov spaces built in all previous cycles and
at the same time without increasing  cost in computing and storing basis
vectors. In this talk, we will discuss two variants of the started GMRES. Both
variants preserve the advantages of the restarted GMRES in their ability to
control cost in computing and storing basis vectors, easiness to implement, and
yet, as overwhelmingly numerical evidence demonstrates, are able to make up the
lost information hidden in thrown-away Krylov spaces for fast convergence.

This is a joint work with Akira Imakura (University of Tsukuba) and Shao-Liang
Zhang (Nagoya University).

