---
title: "Fast spectral function approximation on complex geometries: redundancy and ill-conditioning are sometimes helpful"
speaker: Daan Huybrechs 
speaker-url: https://people.cs.kuleuven.be/~daan.huybrechs/
affil: KU Leuven
date: 2014-11-03 16:30:00
series: mit-amc
talk-url: http://www-math.mit.edu/amc/fall14/huybrechs.pdf
---

It is challenging to construct a basis for a function space that is associated
with a domain with complicated geometry, at least when one aims for spectral
accuracy and fast transforms. A basis should be complete but not redundant, and
this combination of properties is quite restrictive. Things become considerably
easier by relaxing the latter property: it is nearly trivial to find complete
but redundant sets, or frames, for pretty much any domain. This includes exotic
ones like fractal sets. Unfortunately, redundancy implies non-uniqueness and
this in turn may lead to ill-conditioning of several common operations.

In this talk we explore simple frames based on Fourier series for the
approximation of functions on funny domains. These are very much related to
Fourier extensions or Fourier continuations, but they are genuinely
higher-dimensional. A number of results in this area seemingly defy common
intuition about Fourier series. Perhaps most surprising is the observation that
the approximation problem is unstable in theory, but numerically stable in
practice. The stability is due, in fact, to extreme ill-conditioning.

We illustrate the results with a toolbox implemented in Julia. Being based on
Fourier series, most operations can be carried out very efficiently using the
FFT, in spite of the lack of periodicity or any sort of regularity of the
domain under consideration.

