---
title: "An SQP-inspired algorithm for nonsmooth nonconvex optimization"
speaker: Hermann Schichl
speaker-affil: Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna
date: 2015-02-12 16:15:00
series: stanford-la-opt
---

The problem of solving a nonsmooth nonconvex program with nonsmooth
constraints differs significantly from its smooth counterpart.  In case
the objective and constraint functions are no longer C^2 but only locally
Lipschitz, the first-order optimality conditions no longer lead to a
system of equations but to a set relation involving subdifferentials.
This has the consequence that algorithmic approaches that differ from the
smooth case have to be taken for computing solutions.  One of the most
promising classes of solvers are bundle methods.

In this talk I will present the first step on a roadmap towards an
algorithm for solving general nonsmooth nonconvex programs.  Taking
inspiration from the SQP-method for smooth optimization we develop a
second-order bundle method for minimizing a nonsmooth objective function
subject to nonsmooth inequality constraints starting from a strictly
feasible point.  Instead of using a penalty function or filter or a merit
function to deal with the constraints, we determine the search direction
by solving a convex quadratically constrained quadratic program to obtain
good iteration points.  Furthermore, global convergence of the method is
proved under certain mild assumptions.  For a concrete implementation
numerical results will be presented, as well as an application to
certificates of infeasibility and exclusion boxes for numerical constraint
satisfaction problems.

Bio: Hermann Schichl is currently an associate professor at the computer
mathematics group at the faculty of mathematics of the University of
Vienna, Austria.  He received his PhD working on infinite-dimensional
differential geometry at the same university in 1998.  His research
interests include mixed-integer global optimization, nonsmooth optimization,
mathematical modeling, rigorous computing, operations research, and
computational science.  He is the main developer of the COCONUT environment,
a modular software platform for global optimization algorithms.

