---
title: Reconstructing Householder vectors from tall-skinny QR decompositions
speaker: Grey Ballard
speaker-affil: Sandia
speaker-url: http://www.sandia.gov/~gmballa
date: 2015-01-22 16:15:00
series: stanford-la-opt
---

The Tall-Skinny QR (TSQR) algorithm is more communication efficient than
the standard Householder algorithm for QR decomposition of dense
matrices with many more rows than columns.  However, TSQR produces a
different representation of the orthogonal factor and therefore requires
more software development to support the new representation.  Further,
implicitly applying the orthogonal factor to the trailing matrix in the
context of factoring a square matrix is more complicated and costly than
with the Householder representation.

In this talk, I'll show how to perform TSQR and then reconstruct the
Householder vector representation with the same asymptotic communication
efficiency and little extra computational cost.  I'll discuss the high
performance and numerical stability of this algorithm both theoretically
and empirically.  The new Householder reconstruction algorithm allows us
to design more efficient parallel QR algorithms, with significantly
lower latency cost compared to Householder QR and lower bandwidth and
latency costs compared with Communication-Avoiding QR (CAQR) algorithm.
As a result, our final parallel QR algorithm outperforms ScaLAPACK and
Elemental implementations of Householder QR as well as our
implementation of CAQR on Cray XE6 and XC30 systems at NERSC.

Bio: Grey Ballard is currently a Truman Fellow at Sandia National Labs
in Livermore, CA.  He received his PhD in 2013 from UC Berkeley.  He
worked in the BeBOP group and Parallel Computing Laboratory under
advisor James Demmel.  His research interests include numerical linear
algebra, high performance computing, and computational science,
particularly in developing algorithmic ideas that translate to improved
implementations and more efficient software.  His work has been
recognized with the SIAM Linear Algebra Prize and two conference best
paper awards, at SPAA and IPDPS, he received the C.V. Ramamoorthy
Distinguished Research Award at UC Berkeley, and his PhD thesis was
recognized by the ACM Doctoral Dissertation Award - Honorable Mention.
