---
title: The History of "Gaussian" Elimination
speaker: Joe Grcar
date: 2015-02-05 16:15:00
series: stanford-la-opt
---

Gaussian elimination is universally known as "the" method for solving
simultaneous linear equations.  As Leonhard Euler remarked in 1771, it
is "the most natural way" of proceeding.  The method was invented in
China about 2000 years ago, then reinvented in Europe much more recently,
so it is surprising that the primary European sources have not been
identified until now.  It is an interesting story in the history of
computing and technology that Carl Friedrich Gauss came to be mistakenly
identified as the inventor of Gaussian elimination even though he was
not born until 1777.

The European development has three phases.  First came the "schoolbook"
method that began with algebra lessons written by Isaac Newton; what we
learn in high school or middle school is still basically Newton's creation.
Second were methods that professional hand computers used to solve the
normal equations of least squares problems; until comparatively recently
the chief societal use for Gaussian elimination was to solve normal
equations for statistical estimation.  Third was the adoption of matrix
notation in the middle of the 20th century.  Henceforth the schoolbook
lesson and the professional algorithms were understood to be trivially
related in that all can be interpreted as computing triangular decompositions.

Bio:  
Dr Grcar has written several articles on the history and sociology of
science focussing on mathematical sciences and making use of bibliometric
data.  Formerly he was a research scientist specializing in reacting
fluid flow (combustion) calculations at Sandia National Lab and at
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab.  His expertise in numerical analysis
is matrix calculations.  A test matrix and a polynomial preconditioner
are named after him.

